MSC2746: Improved VoIP Signalling (#2746)
matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals: proposals/2746-reliable-voip.md

## Proposal
### Change the `version` field in all VoIP events to `1`
This will be used to determine whether determine whether devices support this new version of the protocol.
If clients see events with `version` other than `0` or `1`, they should treat these the same as if they had
`version` == `1`.

### Add `answer_id` to `m.call.answer`
This is a random string generated by the sending device in the same way as `call_id` (ie. in this case,
it should be sufficiently unique in the context of this VoIP call). This identifies each answer sent to
a given `m.call.invite`.

*Also considered: use the `event_id` of the answer event: this is rejected for similarity with `call_id`
where it is desirable to know the ID of a call before receving the remote echo of the invite event (this
will be useful in future for call transfers where the transferor can assign a `call_id` for the transferee
to use).*

### Add `answer_id` to `m.call.candidates`
This allows the caller to determine which candidate events correspond to which answer (for the callee,
all candidates with matching `call_id` not from its own user are from the caller party, of which there
is only one.)

> ### Introduce `m.call.ack`

Author: Sold!

   rather than sending each candidate as it arrives. A starting point of 2 seconds after sending the
   invite or 500ms after sending the answer is suggested as starting point (since a delay is natural
   anyway after the invite whilst the client waits for the user to accept it).

### Add DTMF
Add that Matrix clients can send DTMF as specified by WebRTC. The WebRTC standard as of August
2020 does not support receiving DTMF but a Matrix client can receive and interpret the DTMF sent
in the RTP payload.

### Deprecate `type` in `m.call.invite` and `m.call.answer`
These are redundant: clients should continue to send them but must not require
them to be present on events they receive.

## Potential issues
 * It remains explicity impossible to place a call to yourself. Matrix uses a shared medium for
   signalling so a client will always see invites from other devices. We would need to introduce
   a way for a client to signal to other devices that they should treat the invite as an incoming
   call and mechanisms to clarify what events were from which party in a call. This would mean a

>    significant amount of protocol dedcated to just this feature, so this MSC omits it.

Author: I think it's something like this along with bumping the `invitee` field from the transfer MSC to here. The 'something like this' could also be done with `answer_id`s in some fashion (maybe renaming them to `party_id` or something) where all messages have such a field to indicate where they're from. I'd have to think it through.

>    significant amount of protocol dedcated to just this feature, so this MSC omits it.

Author: OK - updated to allow for self-calling.

>    significant amount of protocol dedcated to just this feature, so this MSC omits it.

Reviewer: This can probably be resolved now

## Alternatives
 * We could use event IDs for `call_id` and `answer_id` as discussed above.
 * The event type of `m.call.ack` mirrors that of SIP, although gives few other clues on its purpose.
   `m.call.choose_answer` was considered but is quite verbose.
## Security considerations
 * IP addresses remain in the room in candidates, as they did in the previous version of the spec.
   This is not ideal, but alternatives were either sending candidates over to-device messages
   (would slow down call setup because a target device would have to be established before sending
   candidates) or redacting them afterwards (the volume of events sent during calls can already

>    cause rate limiting issues and this would exacerbate this).

Author: I think I'm also missing how this works for MSC2228 in general but it seems like it would break if there are multiple devices, unless we also define rules about only sending RRs after candidate events after you've sent or seen an answer/reject/hangup? Also, there could be candidate events in the invite too but if that gets redacted, we'll lose the record of the call, so we'd have to backpedal on the candidate batching and explicitly not include candidates in the invite/answer.

>    cause rate limiting issues and this would exacerbate this).

Reviewer: I believe this is resolved by https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3401/ as we probably will switch to that for 1:1 calls as well in the future

If clients see events with `version` other than `0` or `1`, they should treat these the same as if they had
`version` == `1`.

### Add `invitee` field to `m.call.invite`
This allows for the following use cases:
 * Placing a call to a specifc user in a room where other users are also present.
 * Placing a call to oneself.
The field should be added for all invites where the target is a specific user. Invites without an `invitee`
field are defined to be intended for any member of the room other than the sender of the event. Clients
should consider an incoming call if they see a non-expired invite event where the `invitee` field is either
absent or equal to their user's Matrix ID, however they should evaluate whether or not to ring based on their
user's trust relationship with the caller, eg. ignoring call invites from users in public rooms that they have
no other connection with. As a starting point, it is suggested that clients ring for any call invite from a user
that they have a direct message room with. It is strongly recommended that when clients do not ring for an
incoming call invite, they still display the invite in the room and annotate that it was ignored.

> ### Add `party_id` to all VoIP events

Author: Yeah, a tuple of `user_id, party_id` would probably be good to be explicit about anyway since the same party_id from a different user must be a different party in any case. They could still race though if two clients generated an answer at the same time: we're relying on the chances of a clash being vanishingly small (which doesn't require a very big ID since there should only be a small number of parties in a single call).

> ### Add `party_id` to all VoIP events

Author: (done)

> ### Add `party_id` to all VoIP events

Reviewer 2: I think "Introduce `m.call.negotiate`" also needs fixing her? Specifically:

> The caller ignores any negotiate events with `party_id` not equal to the `party_id` of the answer it accepted

> ### Add `party_id` to all VoIP events

Author: ah yep - done

> ### Add `party_id` to all VoIP events

Reviewer 3: You could fix the race between different clients from the same user by using the device id in addition to the other ids.

Whenever a client first participates in a new call, it generates a `party_id` for itself to use for the
duration of the call. It adds a `party_id` field containing this ID to all VoIP events it sends on the
call. Clients use this to identify remote echo of their own events, since a user may now call themselves,
they can no longer ignore events from their own user. This field also identifies different answers sent
by different clients to an invite, and matches `m.call.candidate` events to their respective answer/invite.

A client implementation may choose to use the device ID used in end-to-end cryptography for this purpose.

### Introduce `m.call.select_answer`
This event is sent by the caller once it has chosen an answer. Its
`selected_party_id` field indicates the answer it's chosen (and has `call_id`
and its own `party_id` too). If the callee sees a `select_answer` for an answer

> ID other than the one it sent, it ends the call and informs the user the call

Author: ah yep, it started off as `answer_id` and this will be one that got missed because of the line break.

party whose invite had the lexicographically greater call ID becomes the polite party.

### Add explicit recommendations for call event liveness.
`m.call.invite` contains a `lifetime` field that indicates how long the offer is valid for. When
a client receives an invite, it should use the `age` field of the event plus the time since it
received the event from the homeserver to determine whether the invite is still valid. If the
invite is still valid *and will remain valid for long enough for the user to accept the call*,
it should signal an incoming call. The amount of time allowed for the user to accept the call may
vary between clients, for example, it may be longer on a locked mobile device than on an unlocked
desktop device.

The client should only signal an incoming call once it has completed processing the entire sync
response. This ensures that if the sync response contains subsequent events that indicate the call
has been hung up, rejected, or answered elsewhere, the client does not signal it.

If on startup, after processing locally stored events, the client determines that there is an invite

> that is still valid, it should still signal it but only after it has completed a sync from the homeserver.

Reviewer 2: Would it be worth adding that all encrypted messages in an E2EE convo following the invite should be decrypted before signaling? IIRC Element Web had (maybe still has?) an issue in which it would signal a call because it hadn't decrypted the matching m.call.hangup event yet. Though I don't know how well that could be enforced, e.g. if there's an event for which we don't have the keys yet (maybe we could say instead that the client should at least try to decrypt all messages following the invite before signaling?).

Author: good point: we could at least enforced that it attempts decryption on all events in the same room and the same sync response.

   a sufficiently short period of time, these should be sent here too. A delay of around 200ms is
   suggested as a starting point.
 * The client should then allow some time for further candidates to be gathered in order to batch them,
   rather than sending each candidate as it arrives. A starting point of 2 seconds after sending the
   invite or 500ms after sending the answer is suggested as starting point (since a delay is natural
   anyway after the invite whilst the client waits for the user to accept it).

### Add DTMF
Add that Matrix clients can send DTMF as specified by WebRTC. The WebRTC standard as of August
2020 does not support receiving DTMF but a Matrix client can receive and interpret the DTMF sent
in the RTP payload.

### Deprecate `type` in `m.call.invite` and `m.call.answer`
These are redundant: clients should continue to send them but must not require
them to be present on events they receive.

## Potential issues
 * The ability to call yourself makes the protocol a little more complex for clients to implement,
   and is somewhat of a special case. However, some of the necessary additions are necessary for

>    other features so this MSC elects to make it possible.

Reviewer 2: > However, some of the necessary additions are necessary for other features

Is there an extra "necessary" here? I'm having troubles parsing what's necessary for what.

Author: hah, thanks

# MSC2746: Improved Signalling for 1:1 VoIP

Matrix has basic support for signalling 1:1 WebRTC calls, but has a number of shortcomings:

 * If several devices try to answer the same call, there is no way for them to determine clearly
   that the caller has set up the call with a different device, and no way for the caller to
   determine candidate events map to which answer.
 * Hangup reasons are often incorrect.
 * There is confusion and no clear guidance on how clients should determine whether an incoming
   invite is stale or not.
 * There is no support for renegotiation of SDP, for changing ICE candidates / hold/resume
   functionality, etc.
 * There is no distinction between rejecting a call and ending it, which means that in trying
   to reject a call, a client can inadvertantly cause a call that has been sucessfully set up
   on a different device to be hung up.

## Proposal
### Change the `version` field in all VoIP events to `1`
This will be used to determine whether determine whether devices support this new version of the protocol.
If clients see events with `version` other than `0` or `1`, they should treat these the same as if they had

> `version` == `1`.

Author: Basically assuming that new versions will be backwards compatible, and if we made a new version that wasn't, it would have a different type.

> `version` == `1`.

Reviewer 4: new versions will be explicitly numbered though?

or are you trying to deprecate `version`? it seems to have been pretty useful here.

> `version` == `1`.

Author: well, new versions of the spec will supersede this and tell you how to interpret higher numbered events, but until then you assume they are the same as version 1.

> `version` == `1`.

Reviewer 4: ohhh sorry I was being stupid. For some reason I parsed this as "If clients see events with *no* `version`".

field are defined to be intended for any member of the room other than the sender of the event. Clients
should consider an incoming call if they see a non-expired invite event where the `invitee` field is either
absent or equal to their user's Matrix ID, however they should evaluate whether or not to ring based on their
user's trust relationship with the caller, eg. ignoring call invites from users in public rooms that they have
no other connection with. As a starting point, it is suggested that clients ring for any call invite from a user
that they have a direct message room with. It is strongly recommended that when clients do not ring for an
incoming call invite, they still display the invite in the room and annotate that it was ignored.

### Add `party_id` to all VoIP events
Whenever a client first participates in a new call, it generates a `party_id` for itself to use for the
duration of the call. This needs to be long enough that the chance of a collision between multiple devices
both generating an answer at the same time generating the same party ID is vanishingly small: 8 uppercase

> + lowercase alphanumeric characters is recommended. Parties in the call are identified by the tuple of

Author: done at the bottom so it applies for call_ids too

> + lowercase alphanumeric characters is recommended. Parties in the call are identified by the tuple of

Reviewer: This can probably be resolved now

`(user_id, party_id)`.

The client  adds a `party_id` field containing this ID alongside the `user_id` field to all VoIP events it sends on the
call. Clients use this to identify remote echo of their own events, since a user may now call themselves,
they can no longer ignore events from their own user. This field also identifies different answers sent
by different clients to an invite, and matches `m.call.candidate` events to their respective answer/invite.

> A client implementation may choose to use the device ID used in end-to-end cryptography for this purpose.

Reviewer 4: All devices have device IDs; they are not solely for e2e.

Can you expand upon this a bit? Is there a reason not to use the device ID? If not, why not mandate its use rather than inventing a new ID? If so, document those reasons?

Author: Done, although I also don't really mind: I was on the fence and figured it was better not to mandate something for no particular reason.

Reviewer: This can probably be resolved now

> ### Introduce `m.call.select_answer`

Reviewer 4: are we going to release this before spec? can you give unstable prefixes for these new identifiers per https://matrix.org/docs/spec/proposals#early-release-of-a-msc-idea if so?

Author: Not 100% sure yet: I was going to add if / when it was required.

Reviewer 5: Need to spell out that we decided not to use an event type prefix (to simplify implementation), but instead unilaterally grabbing `version: 1` for this MSC, on the condition that this MSC changes the `version` field to a string so that future VoIP MSCs can use it as an experimentation prefix.

Author: done

Reviewer: This can probably be resolved now

This event is sent by the caller's client once it has chosen an answer. Its
`selected_party_id` field indicates the answer it's chosen (and has `call_id`
and its own `party_id` too). If the callee's client sees a `select_answer` for an answer
with party ID other than the one it sent, it ends the call and informs the user the call
was answered elsewhere. It does not send any events. Media can start flowing
before this event is seen or even sent.  Clients that implement previous
versions of this specification will ignore this event and behave as they did
before.

Example:
```
{
    "type": "m.call.select_answer",
    "content": {
        "call_id": "12345",
        "party_id": "67890",
        "selected_party_id": "111213",
    },
}
```

### Introduce `m.call.reject`

>  * If the `m.call.invite` event has `version` `1`, a client wishing to reject a call instead

Reviewer 4: instead of what?

```suggestion
 * If the `m.call.invite` event has `version` `1`, a client wishing to reject the call
```

   sends an `m.call.reject` event. This rejects the call on all devices, but if another device

>    has already sent an accept, it disregards the reject and carries on. The reject has a

Reviewer 4: > it disregards the reject

it == the calling device? it's more about whether the calling device has already received an accept, rather than whether another device has sent one?

Author: fixed

Reviewer: This can probably be resolved now

   `party_id` just like an answer, and the caller sends a `select_answer` for it just like an
   answer. If the other client that had already sent an answer sees the caller select the
   reject response instead of its answer, it ends the call.

>  * If the `m.call.invite` event has `version` `0`, the callee send an `m.call.hangup` event before.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 * If the `m.call.invite` event has `version` `0`, the callee sends an `m.call.hangup` event before.
```

recommendation: https://www.w3.org/TR/webrtc/#hold-functionality

If both the invite event and the accepted answer event have `version` equal to `1`, either party may
send `m.call.negotiate` with an `sdp` field to offer new SDP to the other party. This event has
`call_id` with the ID of the call and `party_id` equal to the client's party ID for that call.
The caller ignores any negotiate events with `party_id` not equal to the `party_id` of the
answer it accepted. Clients should use the `party_id` field to ignore the remote echo of their
own negotiate events.

This has a `lifetime` field as in `m.call.invite`, after which the sender of the negotiate event
should consider the negotiation failed (timed out) and the recipient should ignore it.

Example:
```
{
    "type": "m.call.negotiate",
    "content": {
        "call_id": "12345",
        "party_id": "67890",
        "sdp": "[some sdp]",
        "lifetime": 10000,
    }
}
```

### Designate one party as 'polite'
In line with WebRTC perfect negotiation (https://w3c.github.io/webrtc-pc/#perfect-negotiation-example)
we introduce rules to establish which party is polite. By default, the callee is the polite party.

> In a glare situation, if the client receives an invite whilst preparing to send, it becomes the callee

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In a glare situation, if the client receives an invite whilst preparing to send one, it becomes the callee
```

and therefore becomes the polite party. If an invite is received after the client has sent one, the
party whose invite had the lexicographically greater call ID becomes the polite party.

### Add explicit recommendations for call event liveness.
`m.call.invite` contains a `lifetime` field that indicates how long the offer is valid for. When

> a client receives an invite, it should use the `age` field of the event plus the time since it

Reviewer 4: it might be worth calling out that the `age` isn't part of the event, but is rather added by the HS, per https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#room-event-fields.

It might also be worth explaining why we recommend this dance rather than just using timestamps everywhere (presumably it's because we expect server admins to do better at keeping their clocks in sync than client users?)

Author: have put a bit in that hopefully clarifies

Reviewer: This can probably be resolved now

> # MSC2746: Improved Signalling for 1:1 VoIP

Reviewer 2: One case this MSC should probably also cover is how calls are expected to interact with membership changes; namely what happens when a call is ongoing between two users and one of them leaves the room the call is happening in.

Author: done - hopefully this is clear enough, I tried to make it fairly brief, but I can expand if it needs more detail.

Reviewer: This can probably be resolved now

   trickle ICE before calling, and disable it if so. This would add complexity to every Matrix client as
   well as having to assume that all current clients did not, disabling trickle ICE everywhere until clients
   support the discovery mechanism. The mechanism would also have to be per-user which would make sense for
   bridged users, but not where some of a users devices support trickle ICE and some do not.

## Security considerations
 * IP addresses remain in the room in candidates, as they did in the previous version of the spec.
   This is not ideal, but alternatives were either sending candidates over to-device messages
   (would slow down call setup because a target device would have to be established before sending
   candidates) or redacting them afterwards (the volume of events sent during calls can already
   cause rate limiting issues and this would exacerbate this).
 * Clients must take care to not ring for any call, as per the 'alternatives' section.

## Unstable prefix
Since VoIP events already have a 'version' field, we would ideally use a string, namespaced version during

> development, but this field is defined to be a string in version 0. This MSC proposes changing the version

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
development, but this field is defined to be an int in version 0. This MSC proposes changing the version
```

   devices will continue to ring, and the caller's device will continue to indicate that the call
   is ringing, and will time the call out in the normal way if no other device responds.

### Introduce more reason codes to `m.call.hangup`
 * `ice_timeout`: The connection failed after some media was exchanged (as opposed to current
   `ice_failed` which means no media connection could be established). Note that, in the case of
   an ICE renegotiation, a client should be sure to send `ice_timeout` rather than `ice_failed` if
   media had previously been received successfully, even if the ICE renegotiation itself failed.
 * `user_hangup`: Clients must now send this code when the user chooses to end the call, although
   for backwards compatability, a clients should treat an absence of the `reason` field as
   `user_hangup`.
 * `user_media_failed`: The client was unable to start capturing media in such a way as it is unable
   to continue the call.
 * `unknown_error`: Some other failure occurred that meant the client was unable to continue the call
   rather than the user choosing to end it.

> ### Introduce `m.call.negotiate`

Reviewer 2: As per internal discussion, this section forgets to mention that, upon receiving `m.call.negotiate`, a client must "respond" by sending a second `m.call.negotiate` (e.g. with a session description that includes `a=recvonly` in the case of hold).

   invite or 500ms after sending the answer is suggested as starting point (since a delay is natural
   anyway after the invite whilst the client waits for the user to accept it).

### Mandate the end-of-candidates candidate
Mandate that an ICE candidate whose value is the empty string must be sent in an m.call.candidates
message to signal that no more ICE candidates will be sent. The WebRTC spec requires browsers to
generate such a candidate, however note that at time of writing, not all browsers do (Chrome does
not, but does generate an `icegatheringstatechange` event). The client should send any remaining
candidates once candidate generation finishes, ignoring timeouts above.

This allows bridges to batch the candidates together when bridging to protocols that don't support
trickle ICE.

### Add DTMF
Add that Matrix clients can send DTMF as specified by WebRTC. The WebRTC standard as of August
2020 does not support receiving DTMF but a Matrix client can receive and interpret the DTMF sent
in the RTP payload.

### Specify exact grammar for VoIP IDs
`call_id`s and the newly introduced `party_id` are explicitly defined to be up to 32 characters

> from the set of `A-Z` `a-z` `0-9` `.-_`.

Reviewer 4: The unmerged https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/blob/rav/proposals/id_grammar/proposals/1597-id-grammar.md#opaque-ids proposed a slightly laxer grammar for `call_id` (the suggestion there includes `=`, though per https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1597#discussion_r561097599 I think that should be `~`; it also sets the max length to 255).

I don't think we *need* to use the same grammar across all opaque IDs, though there is some benefit in doing so (it simplifies spec and implementation, reduces potential confusion around what is allowed in what identifier, and hopefully avoids inventing the "what should the grammar be" wheel hundreds of times), so it might be worth considering whether the MSC1597 proposal fits here.

either way, a massive +1 to specifying our grammar here, whatever that grammar actually is.

Author: Fully in favour of this - done.

   well as having to assume that all current clients did not, disabling trickle ICE everywhere until clients
   support the discovery mechanism. The mechanism would also have to be per-user which would make sense for
   bridged users, but not where some of a users devices support trickle ICE and some do not.

## Security considerations
 * IP addresses remain in the room in candidates, as they did in the previous version of the spec.
   This is not ideal, but alternatives were either sending candidates over to-device messages
   (would slow down call setup because a target device would have to be established before sending
   candidates) or redacting them afterwards (the volume of events sent during calls can already
   cause rate limiting issues and this would exacerbate this).
 * Clients must take care to not ring for any call, as per the 'alternatives' section.

## Unstable prefix
Since VoIP events already have a 'version' field, we would ideally use a string, namespaced version during
development, but this field is defined to be an int in version 0. This MSC proposes changing the version

> field to a string so that this namespacing can be used for future changes. Since there is no other easy way

Reviewer 2: Might be worth mentioning that strongly typed implementations will want to support both integers and strings for backwards compatibility.

Reviewer 2: Also I think it's a bit confusing to have this section of the MSC say versions should be strings whereas the rest of it uses integers in the examples.

# MSC2746: Improved Signalling for 1:1 VoIP

Matrix has basic support for signalling 1:1 WebRTC calls, but has a number of shortcomings:

 * If several devices try to answer the same call, there is no way for them to determine clearly
   that the caller has set up the call with a different device, and no way for the caller to
   determine which candidate events map to which answer.
 * Hangup reasons are often incorrect.
 * There is confusion and no clear guidance on how clients should determine whether an incoming
   invite is stale or not.
 * There is no support for renegotiation of SDP, for changing ICE candidates / hold/resume
   functionality, etc.
 * There is no distinction between rejecting a call and ending it, which means that in trying
   to reject a call, a client can inadvertantly cause a call that has been sucessfully set up
   on a different device to be hung up.

## Proposal
### Change the `version` field in all VoIP events to `1`
This will be used to determine whether determine whether devices support this new version of the protocol.

> If clients see events with `version` other than `0` or `1`, they should treat these the same as if they had

Reviewer 3: So we treat `3` as version `1`? Won't that cause issues in the future? Why do we do this?

Reviewer 2: The intent is that newer versions will have their own MSC. This is describing what clients should do should they encounter an unknown version, `0` and `1` being the only known versions in this context.

Reviewer 3: Well, it currently reads like version `3` should be treated as `1`, which sounds wrong.

Reviewer 2: New versions mean implementation changes - in which case you can also change what it considers to be the most recent known version from `1` to something else. It's a bit like with room versions: currently a homeserver will refuse to create/join a room in a version it doesn't know about, but that doesn't mean it will never be able to support this new version. The only difference here is the fallback; in the case of a room version the server refuses to perform the action, in the case of a call the client substitutes it with the most recent known version.

Reviewer 3: So future versions will be compatible enough, that this doesn't cause issues?

Author: Yep, version `3` should be treated identically to `1` by anything implementing this spec. Something implementing a future spec may treat it differently.

Reviewer 3: That sounds like it would cause issues, whenever we actually need to make a breaking change. How would that work? Shouldn't clients instead negotiate the lowest common version instead of treating every newer version as an older version?

Author: If we need to make a breaking change, probably just easier to move to a whole new set of event types.

> `version` == `1`. In addition, clients must accept either a number or a string for the value of the `version`

Reviewer 2: The current version field is an integer, therefore clients need to be able to accept both to maintain backwards compatibility.

> `version` == `1`. In addition, clients must accept either a number or a string for the value of the `version`

Author: seems reasonable if that makes it easier - updated

> `version` == `1`. In addition, clients must accept either a number or a string for the value of the `version`

Reviewer 3: It did, thank you!

field, in order to allow for namespaced versions in the future.

### Define the configurations of WebRTC streams and tracks in each call type
We define that:
 * A voice call has at least one track of kind 'audio' in the first stream

>  * A video call has at least one track of kind 'video' and at least one track of kind 'audio' in the first stream

Reviewer: What are the benefits of call types? I feel like an incoming call type makes sense so that you can tell if the other person wants you to start your webcam but otherwise, I don't think there is a use for this.

Am I missing something?

Reviewer: That makes sense, but perhaps this should be a bit more clear. Also, it's not entirely clear to me if a change between these during a call using `m.call.negotiate` should be allowed.

Clients implementing this specification use the first stream and will ignore any streamless tracks. Note that
in the Javascript WebRTC API, this means `addTrack()` must be passed two parameters: a track and a stream,
not just a track, and in a video call the stream must be the same for both audio and video track.

A client may send other streams and tracks but the behaviour of the other party with respect to presenting
such streams and tracks is undefined.

This follows the existing known implementations of v0 VoIP.

> ### Add `invitee` field to `m.call.invite`

Reviewer 3: This is a string, which can only refer to exactly 1 user? It may be nice to be able to call multiple people at once and just have the first person pick up, like when calling your parents or so. (And maybe in the future group calls?)

This is mentioned in the alternatives section too, where you just don't send any invitee, if you want to call anyone in the room? Having a specific list may be nicer, imo, but then someone who joined afterwards can't pick up, I guess.

Author: Yeah, the intention was that to call a nonspecific person in the room, you'd just not specify an invitee, so depends if we want to cater for the case of calling more than one person in the room, but not everybody.

Reviewer 3: This may be out of scope for this MSC but would be nice in the future, if you could just list multiple invitees. Future-proofing for something, that we don't know, what it will look like, sounds bad, but changing this field to a list later may be difficult as well. I guess just a string is fine for now.

Reviewer: This doesn't seem to be relevant anymore with https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3401/

   for backwards compatability, a clients should treat an absence of the `reason` field as
   `user_hangup`.
 * `user_media_failed`: The client was unable to start capturing media in such a way as it is unable
   to continue the call.
 * `unknown_error`: Some other failure occurred that meant the client was unable to continue the call
   rather than the user choosing to end it.

### Introduce `m.call.negotiate`
This introduces SDP negotiation semantics for media pause, hold/resume, ICE restarts and voice/video
call up/downgrading. Clients should implement & honour hold functionality as per WebRTC's
recommendation: https://www.w3.org/TR/webrtc/#hold-functionality

If both the invite event and the accepted answer event have `version` equal to `1`, either party may
send `m.call.negotiate` with a `description` field to offer new SDP to the other party. This event has
`call_id` with the ID of the call and `party_id` equal to the client's party ID for that call.
The caller ignores any negotiate events with `party_id` + `user_id` tuple not equal to that of the
answer it accepted. Clients should use the `party_id` field to ignore the remote echo of their
own negotiate events.

> This has a `lifetime` field as in `m.call.invite`, after which the sender of the negotiate event

Reviewer 2: As discussed on Matrix, I think it'd be better if `lifetime`s (both in `m.call.negotiate` and `m.call.invite` events) were replaced by timestamps for when the call should time out. That way we don't rely on an arbitrary field set by the server to determine when the call should expire, and we have a single source of truth for when this expiration should happen (i.e. the content set by the client) rather than hoping the client and the server agree on the time (which they often do, but if they don't then it can get complicated). The concern then becomes that clients can get out-of-sync time-wise but in my experience client terminals (i.e. desktops, mobiles, tablets, etc) are much more likely to be time-synced out of the box than servers, so I'm not sure it should be that big of a concern.

Author: Yeah, we might also have covered this on Matrix at the time, but this is basically designed to avoid ever assuming the client clocks will be synced, but assuming those on the HSes are correct (at least within a second or so). It is somewhat interesting that since clients are usually on consumer devices which are managed by the device / OS vendor who sets up NTP, they're now often more likely to have correct clocks than servers which are subject to the server admin forgetting to start ntpd.

Reviewer: @babolivier, what's your view on this?

Author: Since this copies what has already been done in a different place, I'd suggest sticking with this for now and rethinking it in either a new MSC or if we ultimately phase this out in favour of MSC3401.

> should consider the negotiation failed (timed out) and the recipient should ignore it.

Reviewer 3: When does the lifetime start? From the origin_server_ts or when the sender sent it? In the latter case it may make sense to include a sender timestamp?

Author: The origin_server_ts (same as invites)

Reviewer 3: Thanks! *resolved*

            "sdp": "[some sdp]",
            "type": "offer",
	},
    }
}
```

This MSC also proposes clarifying the `m.call.invite` and `m.call.answer` events to state that
the `offer` and `answer` fields respectively are objects of type `RTCSessionDescriptionInit`
(and hence the `type` field, whilst redundant in these events, is included for ease of working
with the WebRTC API).

### Designate one party as 'polite'
In line with WebRTC perfect negotiation (https://w3c.github.io/webrtc-pc/#perfect-negotiation-example)
we introduce rules to establish which party is polite. The callee is always the polite party. In a
glare situation, the politenes of a party is therefore determined by whether the inbound or outbound
call is used: if a client discards its outbound call in favour of an inbound call, it becomes the polite
party.

### Add explicit recommendations for call event liveness.
`m.call.invite` contains a `lifetime` field that indicates how long the offer is valid for. When
a client receives an invite, it should use the event's `age` field in the sync response plus the
time since it received the event from the homeserver to determine whether the invite is still valid.

> The use of the `age` field ensures that incorrect clocks on client devices don't break calls.

Reviewer 3: A significant portion of servers has unsynchronized clocks. At least it is somewhat common in the ping rooms (happens like once a week or so). In that case the user may not have any control over the server to fix that. Is that an acceptable tradeoff, considering that this should be easily enough to notice, since it will affect every user on that server, when calling a different server?

Author: I'm not sure there's much we can do about this considering events could arrive over federation hours or days after the user sent them - or at least not without changing the federation protocol. I think it's assumed as part of federation that it's the HS admin's responsibility to set their clock correctly.

Reviewer 3: I guess we can at least specify a minimum lifetime, that clients should use, like 30s or so, that most servers are synchronized enough to establish a call?

Author: Yeah - I probably wouldn't go as far as specifying this, but we could probably suggest a recommended lifetime and reasons why you might use it (fundamentally we have to give the user enough time to dig a phone out of their pocket anyway).

   rather than sending each candidate as it arrives. A starting point of 2 seconds after sending the
   invite or 500ms after sending the answer is suggested as starting point (since a delay is natural
   anyway after the invite whilst the client waits for the user to accept it).

### Mandate the end-of-candidates candidate
Mandate that an ICE candidate whose value is the empty string must be sent in an m.call.candidates
message to signal that no more ICE candidates will be sent. The WebRTC spec requires browsers to
generate such a candidate, however note that at time of writing, not all browsers do (Chrome does
not, but does generate an `icegatheringstatechange` event). The client should send any remaining
candidates once candidate generation finishes, ignoring timeouts above.

This allows bridges to batch the candidates together when bridging to protocols that don't support
trickle ICE.

### Add DTMF
Add that Matrix clients can send DTMF as specified by WebRTC. The WebRTC standard as of August
2020 does not support receiving DTMF but a Matrix client can receive and interpret the DTMF sent

> in the RTP payload.

Reviewer 3: Could you add why this should be added? From researching what DTMF is supposed to mean, that is not completely obvious to me. Or maybe just explain it to me, doesn't need to be in the MSC, I'm just curious, what this is used for! <3

Reviewer 2: The idea is to support some features that would allow a more enterprise-y use of Matrix's VoIP; DTMF being what allows a VoIP client to process user inputs on the dial pad after the call has been established (so e.g. "press 1 to talk to service X"). While WebRTC doesn't currently support receiving DTMF, allowing sending DTMF from Matrix clients would enable clients to rely on custom implementation to interpret the payloads, or for bridged VoIP/signaling protocols (e.g. SIP) to handle them.

Reviewer 3: That sounds like a very niche case to support, sending a matrix payload would be so much easier and more descriptive. But I'm sure some enterprise will want that xD

Thank you!

Reviewer 2: There, did that for you :)

### Specify exact grammar for VoIP IDs
`call_id`s and the newly introduced `party_id` are explicitly defined to be up to 32 characters
from the set of `A-Z` `a-z` `0-9` `.-_`.

> ### Specify behhaviour on room leave

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Specify behaviour on room leave
```

If the client sees the party it is in a call with leave the room, the client should treat this
as a hangup event for any calls that are in progress. No specific requirement is given for the
situation where a client has sent an invite and the invitee leaves the room, but the client may
wish to treat it as a rejection if there are no more users in the room who could answer the call
(eg. the user is now alone or the `invitee` field was set on the invite).

The same behaviour applies when a client is looking at historic calls.

### Clarify that supported codecs should follow the WebRTC spec
The Matrix spec does not mandate particular audio or video codecs, but instead defers to the

> WebRTC spec. A compliant matrix VoIP client will behave in the same wau as a supported 'browser'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
WebRTC spec. A compliant matrix VoIP client will behave in the same way as a supported 'browser'
```

in terms of what codecs it supports and what variants thereof. The latest WebRTC specification

> applies, so clients should keeps up to date with new versions of the WebRTC specification whether

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
applies, so clients should keep up to date with new versions of the WebRTC specification whether
```

# MSC2746: Improved Signalling for 1:1 VoIP

Historically, Matrix has basic support for signalling 1:1 WebRTC calls which suffer a number of shortcomings:

 * If several devices try to answer the same call, there is no way for them to determine clearly
   that the caller has set up the call with a different device, and no way for the caller to
   determine which candidate events map to which answer.
 * Hangup reasons are often incorrect.
 * There is confusion and no clear guidance on how clients should determine whether an incoming
   invite is stale or not.
 * There is no support for renegotiation of SDP, for changing ICE candidates / hold/resume
   functionality, etc.
 * There is no distinction between rejecting a call and ending it, which means that in trying
   to reject a call, a client can inadvertantly cause a call that has been sucessfully set up
   on a different device to be hung up.

## Proposal
### Change the `version` field in all VoIP events to `1`

> This will be used to determine whether determine whether devices support this new version of the protocol.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This will be used to determine whether devices support this new version of the protocol.
```

If clients see events with `version` other than `0` or `1`, they should treat these the same as if they had

> `version` == `1`. In addition, clients must accept either the number `0` or a string for the value of the `version`

Reviewer 6: The fact that version 1 should be sent as a string creates an issue for backward compatibility in strictly typed languages.

A client that doesn't implement this MSC will fail to deserialize a version 1 invite, although it should be able to answer with a version 0 answer.

This works with Element Web that sends an integer, but not with Element Android that sends a string (see https://github.com/vector-im/element-android/issues/6122).

Reviewer 3: Prior discussion around that lead to the result that only the number 0 can ever be sent as the version field, if it is not a string. A string is required for proper namespacing of experimental call versions. All clients with call support at the time were made compatible with this. Do you have a specific client that fails to parse those events?

Reviewer 6: I was looking into it for Fractal, which relies on the types from Ruma that don't support this MSC for now so it only supports versions as integers.

I agree that supporting strings is a necessary improvement, but the reason invoked that no unstable prefix can be used is the fact that strings are not backwards compatible with the current definition in the spec, so I fail to see the logic here.

Reviewer 6: By the way I'm not saying we should always use/support numbers, just that at least version 1 should be provided as a number.

This shouldn't break current implementations because as I said Element Web sends version 1 as a number and Element Android sends it as a string, so both should be currently supported.

Reviewer 3: That sounds like an Element Web bug... iirc it sent it as a string before.

Reviewer 3: Fixed: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-js-sdk/pull/2471

(Thanks @SimonBrandner )

Reviewer: (np :) )

Reviewer 6: If all implementations are similar I guess this should be fine. I've already fixed that in Ruma, where the problem happened for me in the first place, as part of [implementing this MSC](https://github.com/ruma/ruma/pull/1133).

Reviewer: May I count this as resolved then?

### Introduce more reason codes to `m.call.hangup`
 * `ice_timeout`: The connection failed after some media was exchanged (as opposed to current
   `ice_failed` which means no media connection could be established). Note that, in the case of
   an ICE renegotiation, a client should be sure to send `ice_timeout` rather than `ice_failed` if
   media had previously been received successfully, even if the ICE renegotiation itself failed.
 * `user_hangup`: Clients must now send this code when the user chooses to end the call, although
   for backwards compatability, a clients should treat an absence of the `reason` field as
   `user_hangup`.
 * `user_media_failed`: The client was unable to start capturing media in such a way as it is unable
   to continue the call.
 * `user_busy`: The user is busy. Note that this exists primarily for bridging to other networks such
   as the PSTN. A Matrix client that receives a call whilst already in a call would not generally reject
   the new call unless the user had specifically chosen to do so.
 * `unknown_error`: Some other failure occurred that meant the client was unable to continue the call
   rather than the user choosing to end it.

> ### Introduce `m.call.negotiate`

Reviewer 6: Shouldn't this event have a `version` like the other call events?

should consider the negotiation failed (timed out) and the recipient should ignore it.

The `description` field is the same as the `offer` field in in `m.call.invite` and `answer`
field in `m.call.answer` and is an `RTCSessionDescriptionInit` object as per
https://www.w3.org/TR/webrtc/#dom-rtcsessiondescriptioninit.

Example:
```
{
    "type": "m.call.negotiate",
    "content": {
        "call_id": "12345",
        "party_id": "67890",
        "lifetime": 10000,
	"description": {
            "sdp": "[some sdp]",
            "type": "offer",
	},
    }
}
```

This MSC also proposes clarifying the `m.call.invite` and `m.call.answer` events to state that
the `offer` and `answer` fields respectively are objects of type `RTCSessionDescriptionInit`
(and hence the `type` field, whilst redundant in these events, is included for ease of working
with the WebRTC API).

### Designate one party as 'polite'
In line with WebRTC perfect negotiation (https://w3c.github.io/webrtc-pc/#perfect-negotiation-example)
we introduce rules to establish which party is polite. The callee is always the polite party. In a

> glare situation, the politenes of a party is therefore determined by whether the inbound or outbound

Reviewer 7: Does this replace the [current glare rules](https://spec.matrix.org/latest/client-server-api/#glare) laid out in the spec, specifically taking the call with the smaller call_id, or works somehow in combination with this rule?
> the client should perform a lexicographical comparison of the call IDs of the two calls and use the lesser of the two calls, aborting the greater. If the incoming call is the lesser, the client should accept this call on behalf of the user.

Also, I might be missing something, but I wonder if the rule for who is polite is helpful at all. I have this scenario in mind:

 1. bob and alice are in room `!foo`
 1. bob calls alice with call_id `ABC`
 1. alice calls bob before she received bob's invite with call_id `DEF`
 1. bob receives call invite for `DEF`, and determines this call glares with his outgoing call `ABC`. Given he is the callee in `DEF`, he is the polite peer and hangs up his ABC call with reason replaced.
 1. alice receives call invite for `ABC` (but not yet the hangup), and determines this call glares with her outgoing call `DEF`. Given she is the callee in `ABC`, she is the polite peer and hangs up her `DEF` call with reason replaced.
 1. both calls have now been hung up on?

This assumes this glare rule replaces the rule to take the call with the smallest call_id. If that is not the case, shouldn't the polite peer be the one with the largest call_id?

Reviewer 7: Ah, right, that makes sense! Thanks!

Reviewer 4: If this only applies to renegotiation, it would probably be helpful to say that?

If on startup, after processing locally stored events, the client determines that there is an invite
that is still valid, it should still signal it but only after it has completed a sync from the homeserver.

### Introduce recommendations for batching of ICE candidates
Clients should aim to send a small number of candidate events, with guidelines:
 * ICE candidates which can be discovered immediately or almost immediately in the invite/answer
   event itself (eg. host candidates). If server reflexive or relay candiates can be gathered in
   a sufficiently short period of time, these should be sent here too. A delay of around 200ms is
   suggested as a starting point.
 * The client should then allow some time for further candidates to be gathered in order to batch them,
   rather than sending each candidate as it arrives. A starting point of 2 seconds after sending the
   invite or 500ms after sending the answer is suggested as starting point (since a delay is natural
   anyway after the invite whilst the client waits for the user to accept it).

### Mandate the end-of-candidates candidate

> Mandate that an ICE candidate whose value is the empty string must be sent in an m.call.candidates

Reviewer 5: Using an empty string for this is deeply magical and unintuitive and I just mistook it for a bug and removed it from js-sdk, until Dave pointed this out.  Before this merges, please can we replace it with an explicit `"ice_gathering_status": "complete"` or similar, rather than propagating the the hackiness of webrtc's guts.

Reviewer: Clients are already implementing this the way the MSC suggests, making changing this rather difficult

Reviewer 4: > I just mistook it for a bug and removed it from js-sdk

It sounds like the main problem here was a lack of comments in the implementation, TBH.

message to signal that no more ICE candidates will be sent. The WebRTC spec requires browsers to
generate such a candidate, however note that at time of writing, not all browsers do (Chrome does
not, but does generate an `icegatheringstatechange` event). The client should send any remaining
candidates once candidate generation finishes, ignoring timeouts above.

This allows bridges to batch the candidates together when bridging to protocols that don't support
trickle ICE.

### Add DTMF
Add that Matrix clients can send DTMF as specified by WebRTC. The WebRTC standard as of August
2020 does not support receiving DTMF but a Matrix client can receive and interpret the DTMF sent
in the RTP payload.

We also add a capability to the `capabilities` section of invites and answers (detailed in
[MSC2747](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2747) called `m.call.dtmf`. Clients
should only display UI for sending DTMF during a call if the other party advertises this
capability (boolean value `true`).

> ### Specify exact grammar for VoIP IDs

Reviewer 6: Does this apply retroactively to version 0 calls? Meaning that this shouldn't break any current implementation and as such is more a clarification than a breaking change.

Reviewer: Sorry, I am having a bit of trouble seeing how this could be a breaking change? AFAICT, this just specifies what clients using `version: "1"` should do, what clients using `version: 0` do doesn't seem to be very relevant

What am I missing?

Reviewer 6: It's more a technical question, from an implementation point of view, it would be simpler for us to validate all VoIP IDs, even the ones from version 0.

So the question is: as far as people working on this know, would validating VoIP IDs even for version 0 break anything or was this grammar already respected in implementations?

Author: I'm fairly certain all the Element clients should comply with the spec, especially with the change I just made to use the MSC1597 grammar (which is longer). I can't speak for any other impls though.

 * IP addresses remain in the room in candidates, as they did in the previous version of the spec.
   This is not ideal, but alternatives were either sending candidates over to-device messages
   (would slow down call setup because a target device would have to be established before sending
   candidates) or redacting them afterwards (the volume of events sent during calls can already
   cause rate limiting issues and this would exacerbate this).
 * Clients must take care to not ring for any call, as per the 'alternatives' section.

## Unstable prefix
Since VoIP events already have a 'version' field, we would ideally use a string, namespaced version during
development, but this field is defined to be an int in version 0. This MSC proposes changing the version
field to a string so that this namespacing can be used for future changes. Since there is no other easy way
to namespace events whilst in development and ensure interoperability, we have chosen not to use an unstable
prefix for this change, on the understanding that in future we will be able to use the string `version` field
for the unstable prefix.

For backwards compatibility, strongly typed implementations should allow for

> `version` to be both integer and string.

Reviewer 3: Please no. We already discussed that and decided that clients should accept the integer 0 and otherwise only strings. Having clients send both in a call, 1 and "1", will be terrible. Please let us not do that. And don't encourage clients to send 5 or so in the future.

> # MSC2746: Improved Signalling for 1:1 VoIP

Reviewer 8: as this is an MSC which touches event schemas while Extensible Events is on the battlefield, just a heads up that a v3 of call events is somewhat on the horizon to make them legal in extensible event-supported rooms. I don't think this MSC needs to do anything specific to solve the conflict (unless you want it to, but that means putting an even longer delay on it landing), but implementations of calls should be aware that calls will be changing *again* (sorry).

Author: Yeah, this is probably fine. I think we would want this version of calls defined in a version of the spec in any case.

Historically, Matrix has basic support for signalling 1:1 WebRTC calls which suffer a number of shortcomings:

 * If several devices try to answer the same call, there is no way for them to determine clearly
   that the caller has set up the call with a different device, and no way for the caller to
   determine which candidate events map to which answer.
 * Hangup reasons are often incorrect.
 * There is confusion and no clear guidance on how clients should determine whether an incoming
   invite is stale or not.
 * There is no support for renegotiation of SDP, for changing ICE candidates / hold/resume
   functionality, etc.
 * There is no distinction between rejecting a call and ending it, which means that in trying
   to reject a call, a client can inadvertantly cause a call that has been sucessfully set up
   on a different device to be hung up.

## Proposal
### Change the `version` field in all VoIP events to `"1"`

> This will be used to determine whether devices support this new version of the protocol.

Author: Seems reasonable — merged manually.

If clients see events with `version` other than `0` or `"1"`, they should treat these the same as if they had

> `version` == `"1"`. In addition, clients must accept either the number `0` or a string for the value of the `version`

Reviewer 9: What's the rationale for treating unknown versions as being the same as `"1"`?  That seems dangerous, as a new version could assign different semantics, causing a client to respond incorrectly.

Reviewer 8: uh, mscbot: 

@mscbot concern Unknown version semantics don't appear forwards-compatible.

Reviewer 4: There is another thread on this at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2746#discussion_r583127622. As Dave says there:

> If we need to make a breaking change, probably just easier to move to a whole new set of event types.

Reviewer 9: Yes, I think it would be helpful to explain the rational, and maybe also explain more about how the version is expected to be used in future changes.  Is it useful as a version negotiation mechanism?  e.g. if Alice sends an `m.call.invite` with `version: "2"`, Bob pretends that it's an invite with `version: "1"` and answers the call.  Bob sends an `m.call.answer` with `version: "1"`, and Alice knows that Bob doesn't support version 2, and won't try to add any of the fancy new version 2 stuff.

Author: Have added a bit of rationale in 1392eaef62dab5ce458b3385e90c9540f4bb1f53. I haven't included much more around what future versions might do and version negotiation as I struggled a bit with what to actually write.

> `version` == `"1"`. In addition, clients must accept either the number `0` or a string for the value of the `version`

Author: Yeah — added in a09be957

`video` (creating a video call).

Clients implementing this specification use the first stream and will ignore any streamless tracks. Note that
in the Javascript WebRTC API, this means `addTrack()` must be passed two parameters: a track and a stream,
not just a track, and in a video call the stream must be the same for both audio and video track.

A client may send other streams and tracks but the behaviour of the other party with respect to presenting
such streams and tracks is undefined.

This follows the existing known implementations of v0 VoIP.

### Add `invitee` field to `m.call.invite`
This allows for the following use cases:
 * Placing a call to a specifc user in a room where other users are also present.
 * Placing a call to oneself.

The field should be added for all invites where the target is a specific user. Invites without an `invitee`
field are defined to be intended for any member of the room other than the sender of the event. Clients
should consider an incoming call if they see a non-expired invite event where the `invitee` field is either
absent or equal to their user's Matrix ID, however they should evaluate whether or not to ring based on their

> user's trust relationship with the caller, eg. ignoring call invites from users in public rooms that they have

Author: This has been reworded anyway and is now shorter, so hopefully ok.

no other connection with. As a starting point, it is suggested that clients ring for any call invite from a user

> that they have a direct message room with. It is strongly recommended that when clients do not ring for an

Reviewer 9: I know this is just a suggestion, so may not have much effect on what clients do in practice, but I have DMs with users that I don't necessarily trust to not be malicious.  I'd suggest that not ringing in any publicly-joinable room would be safer, and would pose few downsides.  Or add something to the power levels so that calls from only certain people will ring (defaulting to PL50) like was added for at-room mentions.

> incoming call invite, they still display the invite in the room and annotate that it was ignored.

Author: Merged manually in 48527fcb

### Add `party_id` to all VoIP events

> Whenever a client first participates in a new call, it generates a `party_id` for itself to use for the

Reviewer 9: It might be worth mentioning somewhere that this includes the caller adding the `party_id` to the `m.call.invite` event.  I missed that the first time.

Author: (With typos fixed in the next commit).

duration of the call. This needs to be long enough that the chance of a collision between multiple devices
both generating an answer at the same time generating the same party ID is vanishingly small: 8 uppercase +
lowercase alphanumeric characters is recommended. Parties in the call are identified by the tuple of
`(user_id, party_id)`.

> The client  adds a `party_id` field containing this ID alongside the `user_id` field to all VoIP events it sends on the

Reviewer 9: Do VoIP events have a `user_id` field?  It isn't mentioned anywhere else, and we already have the event's `sender`.

Reviewer 8: @mscbot concern Where does the user_id field come from?

(anyone on the SCT is welcome to resolve this concern when resolved in the MSC - I don't think mscbot tracks authors of concerns)

Author: Excellent point - presumably I meant sender but hallucinated some fictitious content-level field instead. Fixed in c52a845b.

Reviewer 9: @mscbot resolve Where does the user_id field come from?

call. Clients use this to identify remote echo of their own events, since a user may now call themselves,
they can no longer ignore events from their own user. This field also identifies different answers sent

> by different clients to an invite, and matches `m.call.candidate` events to their respective answer/invite.

Author: Merged manually in 312cdf72

A client implementation may choose to use the device ID used in end-to-end cryptography for this purpose,
or it may choose, for example, to use a different one for each call to avoid lekaing information on which
devices were used in a call (in an unencrypted room) or if a single device (ie. access token were used to
send signalling for more than one call party.

### Introduce `m.call.select_answer`
This event is sent by the caller's client once it has chosen an answer. Its
`selected_party_id` field indicates the answer it's chosen (and has `call_id`
and its own `party_id` too). If the callee's client sees a `select_answer` for an answer
with party ID other than the one it sent, it ends the call and informs the user the call
was answered elsewhere. It does not send any events. Media can start flowing
before this event is seen or even sent.  Clients that implement previous
versions of this specification will ignore this event and behave as they did
before.

Example:
```
{
    "type": "m.call.select_answer",
    "content": {
        "version": "1",
        "call_id": "12345",
        "party_id": "67890",
        "selected_party_id": "111213",

>     },

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    }
```

}
```

### Introduce `m.call.reject`

 * If the `m.call.invite` event has `version` `"1"`, a client wishing to reject the call
   sends an `m.call.reject` event. This rejects the call on all devices, but if the calling

>    device sees an accept, it disregards the reject event and carries on. The reject has a

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   device sees an `answer` before the `reject`, it disregards the reject event and carries on. The reject has a
```

I think?

   `party_id` just like an answer, and the caller sends a `select_answer` for it just like an

>    answer. If the other client that had already sent an answer sees the caller select the
>    reject response instead of its answer, it ends the call.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   answer. If another client had already sent an answer and sees the caller select the
   reject response instead of its answer, it ends the call.
```

>    answer. If the other client that had already sent an answer sees the caller select the
>    reject response instead of its answer, it ends the call.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   answer. If another client had already sent an answer and sees the caller select the
   reject response instead of its answer, it ends the call.
```

 * If the `m.call.invite` event has `version` `0`, the callee sends an `m.call.hangup` event before.

Example:
```
{
    "type": "m.call.reject",
    "content" : {
        "version": "1",
        "call_id": "12345",
        "party_id": "67890",
    }
}
```

If the calling user chooses to end the call before setup is complete, the client sends `m.call.hangup`
as previously.

### Clarify what actions a client may take in response to an invite
The client may:

>  * Attempt to accept the call by sending an answer

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 * Attempt to accept the call by sending an `m.call.answer`.
```

>  * Actively reject the call everywhere: reject the call as per above, which will stop the call from

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 * Actively reject the call everywhere: send an `m.call.reject` as per above, which will stop the call from
```

   ringing on all the user's devices and the caller's client will inform them that the user has
   rejected their call.
 * Ignore the call: send no events, but stop alerting the user about the call. The user's other
   devices will continue to ring, and the caller's device will continue to indicate that the call
   is ringing, and will time the call out in the normal way if no other device responds.

> ### Introduce more reason codes to `m.call.hangup`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Introduce more reason codes to [`m.call.hangup`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.5/client-server-api/#mcallhangup)
```

 * `ice_timeout`: The connection failed after some media was exchanged (as opposed to current
   `ice_failed` which means no media connection could be established). Note that, in the case of
   an ICE renegotiation, a client should be sure to send `ice_timeout` rather than `ice_failed` if
   media had previously been received successfully, even if the ICE renegotiation itself failed.
 * `user_hangup`: Clients must now send this code when the user chooses to end the call, although

>    for backwards compatability, a clients should treat an absence of the `reason` field as

Author: This was basically what I meant, so it's backwards compat with v0 - clarified, hopefully.

   `user_hangup`.

>  * `user_media_failed`: The client was unable to start capturing media in such a way as it is unable

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 * `user_media_failed`: The client was unable to start capturing media in such a way that it is unable
```

   to continue the call.
 * `user_busy`: The user is busy. Note that this exists primarily for bridging to other networks such
   as the PSTN. A Matrix client that receives a call whilst already in a call would not generally reject
   the new call unless the user had specifically chosen to do so.
 * `unknown_error`: Some other failure occurred that meant the client was unable to continue the call
   rather than the user choosing to end it.

### Introduce `m.call.negotiate`
This introduces SDP negotiation semantics for media pause, hold/resume, ICE restarts and voice/video
call up/downgrading. Clients should implement & honour hold functionality as per WebRTC's
recommendation: https://www.w3.org/TR/webrtc/#hold-functionality

If both the invite event and the accepted answer event have `version` equal to `"1"`, either party may
send `m.call.negotiate` with a `description` field to offer new SDP to the other party. This event has
`call_id` with the ID of the call and `party_id` equal to the client's party ID for that call.
The caller ignores any negotiate events with `party_id` + `user_id` tuple not equal to that of the

> answer it accepted. Clients should use the `party_id` field to ignore the remote echo of their

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
answer it accepted and the callee ignores any negotiate events with `party_id` + `user_id` tuple not equal to that of the caller. Clients should use the `party_id` field to ignore the remote echo of their
```

?

own negotiate events.

This has a `lifetime` field as in `m.call.invite`, after which the sender of the negotiate event
should consider the negotiation failed (timed out) and the recipient should ignore it.

The `description` field is the same as the `offer` field in in `m.call.invite` and `answer`
field in `m.call.answer` and is an `RTCSessionDescriptionInit` object as per
https://www.w3.org/TR/webrtc/#dom-rtcsessiondescriptioninit.

Example:
```
{
    "type": "m.call.negotiate",
    "content": {
        "version": "1",
        "call_id": "12345",
        "party_id": "67890",
        "lifetime": 10000,
        "description": {
            "sdp": "[some sdp]",
            "type": "offer",
	},
    }
}
```

Once an `m.call.negotiate` event is received, the client must respond with an

> event of the same type with type with the SDP answer (`type: "answer"`).

Reviewer 9: This sentence parses strangely.  I'm assuming "event of the same type" means "event of type `m.call.negotiate`", and "with type with the SDP answer" means that you're supposed to throw the SDP answer in the `description` field, and put `"type": "answer"` in there?  I'm not sure whether "type with type with" is accidentally duplicating words, or is purposeful.  This is exacerbated by the fact that I have no idea how SDP works.

Reviewer 4: Better to word this as:

>  ... must respond with another `m.call.negotiate` event, with the SDP answer (with `"type": "answer") in the `description` property.

Author: Yeah, you're right — done.

This MSC also proposes clarifying the `m.call.invite` and `m.call.answer` events to state that
the `offer` and `answer` fields respectively are objects of type `RTCSessionDescriptionInit`
(and hence the `type` field, whilst redundant in these events, is included for ease of working

> with the WebRTC API).

Reviewer 4: this rather raises the question of what clients are supposed to do if they receive invites or answers with an incorrect "type". Same as any other invalid SDP I suppose? But clients aren't allowed to assume that there will be a `type`?

Author: Hmm, yeah. We could just say ignore it altogether but it's (generally?) included for the reason above?

Author: Is ce0e3388 better?

### Designate one party as 'polite'
In line with WebRTC perfect negotiation (https://w3c.github.io/webrtc-pc/#perfect-negotiation-example)
we introduce rules to establish which party is polite. The callee is always the polite party. In a
glare situation, the politenes of a party is therefore determined by whether the inbound or outbound
call is used: if a client discards its outbound call in favour of an inbound call, it becomes the polite
party.

### Add explicit recommendations for call event liveness.
`m.call.invite` contains a `lifetime` field that indicates how long the offer is valid for. When
a client receives an invite, it should use the event's `age` field in the sync response plus the
time since it received the event from the homeserver to determine whether the invite is still valid.

> The use of the `age` field ensures that incorrect clocks on client devices don't break calls.

Reviewer 4: ... or it would, if it wasn't [totally broken](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/issues/8429).

Author: Fun. We could assume all client clocks are synced nowadays and abandon age, although it's only broken in the impl, by the sounds of it, not at the spec level?

If the invite is still valid *and will remain valid for long enough for the user to accept the call*,
it should signal an incoming call. The amount of time allowed for the user to accept the call may

> vary between clients, for example, it may be longer on a locked mobile device than on an unlocked

Reviewer 4: comma splice 

```suggestion
vary between clients. For example, it may be longer on a locked mobile device than on an unlocked
```

that is still valid, it should still signal it but only after it has completed a sync from the homeserver.

The minimal recommended lifetime is 90 seconds - this should give the user
enough time to actually pick up the call.

### Introduce recommendations for batching of ICE candidates
Clients should aim to send a small number of candidate events, with guidelines:
 * ICE candidates which can be discovered immediately or almost immediately in the invite/answer
   event itself (eg. host candidates). If server reflexive or relay candiates can be gathered in
   a sufficiently short period of time, these should be sent here too. A delay of around 200ms is
   suggested as a starting point.
 * The client should then allow some time for further candidates to be gathered in order to batch them,
   rather than sending each candidate as it arrives. A starting point of 2 seconds after sending the
   invite or 500ms after sending the answer is suggested as starting point (since a delay is natural
   anyway after the invite whilst the client waits for the user to accept it).

### Mandate the end-of-candidates candidate

> Mandate that an ICE candidate whose value is the empty string must be sent in an m.call.candidates

Reviewer 4: https://spec.matrix.org/v1.5/client-server-api/#mcallcandidates doesn't seem to say anything about an empty string meaning "end of candidates": should it?

Author: No: the intention was to define it here, although maybe it's not clear. I've changed 'mandate' to 'define' which maybe helps?

message to signal that no more ICE candidates will be sent. The WebRTC spec requires browsers to
generate such a candidate, however note that at time of writing, not all browsers do (Chrome does
not, but does generate an `icegatheringstatechange` event). The client should send any remaining
candidates once candidate generation finishes, ignoring timeouts above.

This allows bridges to batch the candidates together when bridging to protocols that don't support
trickle ICE.

### Add DTMF
Add that Matrix clients can send DTMF as specified by WebRTC. The WebRTC standard as of August
2020 does not support receiving DTMF but a Matrix client can receive and interpret the DTMF sent

> in the RTP payload.

Reviewer 4: so wait, WebRTC supports *sending* DTMF but not receiving it?

Author: Indeed: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WebRTC_API/Using_DTMF (I think they assume that you're only going to be writing clients with the WebRTC JS API, and DTMF is more useful on the server side).

We also add a capability to the `capabilities` section of invites and answers (detailed in

> [MSC2747](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2747) called `m.call.dtmf`. Clients

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[MSC2747](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2747)) called `m.call.dtmf`. Clients
```

should only display UI for sending DTMF during a call if the other party advertises this

> capability (boolean value `true`).

Reviewer 4: this seems like it adds a dependency on MSC2747 to this MSC. This paragraph probably needs moving to MSC2747, since this one is proposed for FCP.

### Specify exact grammar for VoIP IDs

> `call_id`s and the newly introduced `party_id` are explicitly defined to be in the grammar of
> 'opaque IDs' from [MSC1597](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/rav/proposals/id_grammar/proposals/1597-id-grammar.md#opaque-ids).

Reviewer 4: Given that MSC1597 hasn't landed yet, it might be problematic to define it in this way.

```suggestion
`call_id`s and the newly introduced `party_id` are explicitly defined to be between 1 
and 255 characters long, consisting of the characters `[0-9a-zA-Z._~-]`. 

(Note that this matches the grammar of 'opaque IDs' from  
[MSC1597](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/rav/proposals/id_grammar/proposals/1597-id-grammar.md#opaque-ids),
and that of the `id` property of the
 [`m.login.sso` flow schema](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.5/client-server-api/#definition-mloginsso-flow-schema).)
```

### Specify behaviour on room leave

> If the client sees the party it is in a call with leave the room, the client should treat this

Reviewer 4: given party ~= device, we don't know if the party leaves, right?

 ```suggestion
If the client sees the user it is in a call with leave the room, the client should treat this
```

   other features so this MSC elects to make it possible.
 * Clients must make a decision on whether to ring for any given call: defining this in the spec
   would be cumbersome and would limit clients' ability to use reputation-based systems for this
   decision in the future. However, having a call ring on one client and not the other because one
   had categorised it as a junk call and not the other would be confusing for the user.

## Alternatives
 * This MSC does not allow for ICE negotiation before the user chooses to answer the call. This can
   make call setup faster by allowing connectivity to be established whilst the call is ringing. This
   is problematic with Matrix since any device or user could answer the call, so it is not known which
   device is going to answer before the user chooses to answer. It would also leak information on which
   of a user's devices were online.
 * We could define that the ID of a call is implcitly the event IDs of the invite event rather than
   having a specific `call_id` field. This would mean that a client would be unable to know the ID of

>    a call before the remote echo of the invite came back, which could complicate implementations.

Reviewer 9: That's not true.  The sender gets the event ID back from the `/rooms/{roomId}/{eventType}/{txnId}` call.  It doesn't need to wait for the remote echo.

But I do agree that there doesn't seem to be a compelling reason to change it from how version `0` works.

# MSC2746: Improved Signalling for 1:1 VoIP

Historically, Matrix has basic support for signalling 1:1 WebRTC calls which suffer a number of shortcomings:

 * If several devices try to answer the same call, there is no way for them to determine clearly
   that the caller has set up the call with a different device, and no way for the caller to
   determine which candidate events map to which answer.
 * Hangup reasons are often incorrect.
 * There is confusion and no clear guidance on how clients should determine whether an incoming
   invite is stale or not.
 * There is no support for renegotiation of SDP, for changing ICE candidates / hold/resume
   functionality, etc.
 * There is no distinction between rejecting a call and ending it, which means that in trying
   to reject a call, a client can inadvertantly cause a call that has been sucessfully set up
   on a different device to be hung up.

## Proposal
### Change the `version` field in all VoIP events to `"1"`

> The version property is changed to `"1"` in all existing VoIP events
> ([`m.call.answer`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.5/client-server-api/#mcallanswer),
> [`m.call.candidates`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.5/client-server-api/#mcallcandidates),
> [`m.call.hangup`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.5/client-server-api/#mcallhangup)
> [`m.call.invite`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.5/client-server-api/#mcallinvite)).

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
The version property is changed to `"1"` in all existing VoIP events
([`m.call.answer`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.5/client-server-api/#mcallanswer),
[`m.call.candidates`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.5/client-server-api/#mcallcandidates),
[`m.call.hangup`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.5/client-server-api/#mcallhangup)
[`m.call.invite`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.5/client-server-api/#mcallinvite)). Note
that this changes the type of the `version` field from an integer to a string, as
described in the [Unstable Prefix](#unstable-prefix) section.
```

   rather than the user choosing to end it.

### Introduce `m.call.negotiate`
This introduces SDP negotiation semantics for media pause, hold/resume, ICE restarts and voice/video
call up/downgrading. Clients should implement & honour hold functionality as per WebRTC's
recommendation: https://www.w3.org/TR/webrtc/#hold-functionality

If both the invite event and the accepted answer event have `version` equal to `"1"`, either party may
send `m.call.negotiate` with a `description` field to offer new SDP to the other party. This event has
`call_id` with the ID of the call and `party_id` equal to the client's party ID for that call.
The caller ignores any negotiate events with `party_id` + `user_id` tuple not equal to that of the
answer it accepted and the callee ignores any negotiate events with `party_id` + `user_id` tuple not equal to that of the caller. Clients should use the `party_id` field to ignore the remote echo of their
own negotiate events.

This has a `lifetime` field as in `m.call.invite`, after which the sender of the negotiate event
should consider the negotiation failed (timed out) and the recipient should ignore it.

> The `description` field is the same as the `offer` field in in `m.call.invite` and `answer`

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
The `description` field is the same as the `offer` field in `m.call.invite` and `answer`
```

sync response for that room. This ensures that if the sync response contains subsequent events that
indicate the call has been hung up, rejected, or answered elsewhere, the client does not signal it.

If on startup, after processing locally stored events, the client determines that there is an invite
that is still valid, it should still signal it but only after it has completed a sync from the homeserver.

The minimal recommended lifetime is 90 seconds - this should give the user
enough time to actually pick up the call.

### Introduce recommendations for batching of ICE candidates
Clients should aim to send a small number of candidate events, with guidelines:
 * ICE candidates which can be discovered immediately or almost immediately in the invite/answer
   event itself (eg. host candidates). If server reflexive or relay candiates can be gathered in
   a sufficiently short period of time, these should be sent here too. A delay of around 200ms is
   suggested as a starting point.
 * The client should then allow some time for further candidates to be gathered in order to batch them,
   rather than sending each candidate as it arrives. A starting point of 2 seconds after sending the

>    invite or 500ms after sending the answer is suggested as starting point (since a delay is natural

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
   invite or 500ms after sending the answer is suggested as a starting point (since a delay is natural
```

   is problematic with Matrix since any device or user could answer the call, so it is not known which
   device is going to answer before the user chooses to answer. It would also leak information on which
   of a user's devices were online.
 * We could define that the ID of a call is implicitly the event ID of the invite event rather than
   having a specific `call_id` field. This would mean that a client would be unable to know the ID of
   a call before the it received the response from sending the invite event, which could complicate
   implementations. There is probably no compelling reason to change this.
 * `m.call.select_answer` was chosen such that its name reflect the intention of the event. `m.call.ack`
   is more succinct and mirrors SIP, but this MSC opts for the more descriptive name.
 * This MSC elects to allow invites without an `invitee` field to mean a call for anyone in the room.
   This could be useful for hunt group style semantics where an incoming call causes many different
   users' phones to ring and any one of them may pick up the call. This does mean clients will need

>    to not blindly ring for any call invites in any room, since this would make unsolicited calls in

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
   to not blindly ring for any call invites in any room, since this would make unsolicited calls
```

## Proposal
### Change the `version` field in all VoIP events to `"1"`
The version property is changed to `"`1`" in all existing VoIP events
([`m.call.answer`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.5/client-server-api/#mcallanswer),
[`m.call.candidates`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.5/client-server-api/#mcallcandidates),
[`m.call.hangup`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.5/client-server-api/#mcallhangup)
[`m.call.invite`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.5/client-server-api/#mcallinvite)).
This will be used to determine whether devices support this new version of the protocol.

This will be used to determine whether devices support this new version of the protocol. For example,
clients can use this field to know whether to expect an `m.call.select_answer` event from their
opponent. If clients see events with `version` other than `0` or `"1"`, they should treat these the
same as if they had `version` == `"1"` (including the numeric value `1`). In addition, clients must
accept either the number `0` or a string for the value of the `version` field, in order to allow for

> namespaced versions in the future.

Author: I think this is now all covered by the previous parts, so I think the best option is to remove this.

   invite or 500ms after sending the answer is suggested as starting point (since a delay is natural
   anyway after the invite whilst the client waits for the user to accept it).

### Mandate the end-of-candidates candidate
Mandate that an ICE candidate whose value is the empty string must be sent in an m.call.candidates
message to signal that no more ICE candidates will be sent. The WebRTC spec requires browsers to
generate such a candidate, however note that at time of writing, not all browsers do (Chrome does

> not). The client should send any remaining candidates once candidate generation finishes, ignoring

Reviewer 5: presumably we should note that Chrome generates an event instead (rather than emitting an empty candidate), assuming that's what happens?

Also, what happens if new candidates emerge minutes into the call (e.g. due to network interfaces changing)?

Author: Added chrome `icegatheringstatechange` bit. If new candidates emerge layer I think that would be handled by renegotiation

Reviewer: This can probably be resolved now

   anyway after the invite whilst the client waits for the user to accept it).

### Mandate the end-of-candidates candidate

> Define that an ICE candidate whose value is the empty string means that no more ICE candidates will
> be sent and mandate that clients must send such a candidate in an `m.call.candidates` message.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Define that an ICE candidate whose value is the empty string means that no more ICE candidates will
be sent, and mandate that clients must send such a candidate in an `m.call.candidates` message.
```

   anyway after the invite whilst the client waits for the user to accept it).

### Mandate the end-of-candidates candidate
Define that an ICE candidate whose value is the empty string must be sent in an m.call.candidates

> message to signal that no more ICE candidates will be sent. The WebRTC spec requires browsers to

Author: Incorporated manually: 2919112d
